# ENSO-TimeSeriesAnalysis

The project aims and objectives, the methods and results, and the discussion are presented in my master thesis report entitled Lustig_FinalReport_2011.pdf

Most climate fluctuations may be modulated by a variety of periodic or quasi-periodic deterministic forcing (e.g. diurnal, seasonal, Milankovitch cycle). This process modulation often induce cyclostationary (CS) behaviour defined as periodic correlations. We proposed here that quasi-periodic modulations may appear when the inertia (memory) of a process is modulating its pure CS property. Such process was said to exhibit an Extended AutoCorrelation (EAC) if its time-variant autocorrelation was periodic ’in average’ in time and frequency domains. A new statistical tool has been developed to analyze EAC in a time series with the help of a comfortable time-frequency visualization, called Digital X Model (DXM). We examined the seasonal-to-interannual varibility of El Nino/Southern Oscillation (ENSO) signals by the DXM. Results were compared to those obtained by the Monte-Carlo Singular Spectrum Analysis (SSA), the wavelet analysis and the Empirical Mode Decomposition (EMD). This comparative approach applied to SOI and SST (Nino 3) indices confirmed the well-know interannual periodicities discussed in literature: the quasi-biennial (QB), 29 months, and the quasi-quadrennial (QQ), 50 months. The main result presented here was that these significant cycles were the only one detected by the four methods, suggesting that the QB and the QQ would be the fundamental modes of ENSO. In addition, the QB was strongly associated to the atmospheric component of ENSO and the QQ associated to the oceanic component of ENSO. These results lead to the hypothesis that the QB and QQ could be separate oscillations generated by differing physics. The interaction of theses fundamental modes with the seasonal cycle could produce three additional minor periodicities by combination of tones, the 15-, 20- and 69 months oscillations, detected by the DXM and sometimes found in the three other methods.

The data/code presented here include:
- DXM_matlab : The Matlab version of the Digital X Model (DXM)
- SSA_matlab : The Matlab version of the Monte-Carlo Singular Spectrum Analysis (SSA)
- Wavelet_matlab : The Matlab version of the wavelet analysis
- EMD_matlab : The Matlab version of the Empirical Mode Decomposition (EMD)
- Data : The data used in this study. All data are based on the time series provided by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Climate Prediction Center (CPC) - http://www.cpc.ncep.noaa.gov/data/indices/. 

Data description:
The SOI, commonly used to quantify the atmospheric ENSO variations, is defined as the normalized sea-level atmosphere pressure difference between Tahiti and Darwin, Australia. The data set used in this analysis is the monthly SOI time series from January 1951 though July 2014. A anomalously negative value of this index indicates a warm event (El Nino), while a highly positive value is associated with a cold event (La Nina). The oceanic component of ENSO is commonly quantified by the indexes Nino 1-2, Nino 3, Nino 4 and Nino 3.4 defined as the sea surface temperature (SST) averaged over the eastern half of the tropical Pacific, respectively located at (0N − 10S, 90E − 80W ), (5N − 5S, 150W − 90W ), (5N − 5S, 170E− 120W ) and (5N − 5S, 160E − 150W ). The time interval considered for the four indices is from January 1950 to July 2014. All data are based on the time series provided by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Climate Prediction Center (CPC). The data are normalized with respect to the standard deviation computed over the same interval to allow for a better comparison between time series.

The data presented here include:
- monthly-SOI-anomaly-1951-2014.txt : Monthly Southern Oscillation Index (SOI) (Tahiti - Darwin) Sea Level Pressure
- monthly-SOI-standardized-1951-2014.txt : Standardized monthly Southern Oscillation Index (SOI) (Stand Tahiti - Stand Darwin) Sea Level Pressure
- monthly-SST-1950-2014.txt : OISST.v2 (1981-2010 based preiod) Monthly See Surface Temperature
- weekly-SST-1982-2014.txt : OISST.v2 (1981-2010 base period) Weekly See Surface Temperature
- SOI.txt : Tensformed SOI data used in my thesis report in 2011.
